Overhaul "Learn Shiny" content to be Express focused (#68)
posit-dev/py-shiny-site: docs/express-motivation.qmd

---
title: Motivation
editor:
  markdown:
    wrap: sentence
format:
  html:
    include-in-header: assets/head-content.html
---

So far, we've really only seen Shiny _Express_: a simple way to learn and create basic apps.
As we'll discuss here, the same things that make Express simple also make it difficult to manage complexity when your app grows in size and sophistication.[^streamlit-comp]

> And, although we'll cover some techniques for managing complexity and adding sophistication to Express, when you find yourself reaching for these techniques, it might be time to switch to Shiny Core.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article we'll cover some techniques for managing complexity and adding sophistication to Express, but when you find yourself reaching for these techniques too often it might be time to switch to Shiny Core.
```

> Shiny Core is a slightly more involved way to write apps using the same [components](ui-components.qmd) and [reactivity](reactive-foundations.qmd) you've already learned.

Reviewer: I personally prefer the term "structured" to "involved" because I think it's a bit more accurate, but also not negative.

> The main difference is that Shiny Core embraces concepts like [decoupling](#decoupling) and [functional programming](#functional) which enforces programming patterns that, although require more effort upfront, will make it easier to manage complexity as your app grows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main difference between Shiny Core and Shiny Express is that Shiny Core embraces concepts like [decoupling](#decoupling) and [functional programming](#functional). These programming patterns require a little more effort upfront, will make it much easier to manage complexity as your app grows.
```

If you're already convinced that Shiny Core is right for your app, the [next article](express-difference.qmd) outlines the syntax differences and provides a guide for transitioning from Express to Core.

> [^streamlit-comp]: [Streamlit](https://streamlit.io/) is similar to Express in that it's easy to get started with, but difficult to manage complexity. See [this article](https://www.shinyapps.io/articles/streamlit-vs-shiny/) for a comparison between Streamlit and Shiny.

Reviewer: I think I might make this a callout pointing to another article. I don't think Streamlit users are going to be interested in Core at all, so by the time they get here they'll be on board with Shiny. Also Express way way better at managing complexity than Streamlit, so I probably wouldn't equate them. Express is a lot closer to Core on this metric than it is to Streamlit.

## Decoupling {#decoupling}

> A big reason for Express' simplicity is that things like render functions get displayed exactly where they appear in the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shiny Express apps are simple to write because render functions get displayed exactly where they appear in the code.
```

Reviewer: This might be too strong, but I think it's accurate. It seems like this was the main goal of Express and everything else kind of flowed from accomplishing that goal.

> This is great for basic apps, since you don't have to separate backend from frontend (aka server from UI) logic.

Reviewer: This bugs me a bit because the reader probably doesn't really get front-end and back-end at this point. I think I might just assert that it's great for basic apps and not say why. So something like:

"This is great for simple apps, but can lead to code that's harder to reason about as your application grows in size and complexity."

However, this can lead to code that's harder to reason about when it grows in size and complexity.

> For example, consider this snippet Express app -- can you visualize, at a glance, how the overall UI is structured?

Reviewer: I like this question formulation a lot

            # Create scatter plots for each pair of features
            for i in range(len(features)):
                for j in range(len(features)):
                    if i != j:
                        for species in df['species'].unique():
                            axs[i, j].scatter(df[df['species']==species][features[i]],
                                              df[df['species']==species][features[j]],
                                              label=species)
                        axs[i, j].set_xlabel(features[i])
                        axs[i, j].set_ylabel(features[j])
                    else:
                        axs[i, j].text(0.5, 0.5, features[i], ha='center', va='center')

            # Add a legend
            handles, labels = axs[0, 1].get_legend_handles_labels()
            fig.legend(handles, labels, loc='upper center')

            fig.tight_layout()
            return fig
        ui.input_select("species", "Species", ["Chinstrap", "Adelie", "Gentoo"])
```
</details>

The `render.plot` function above has a lot going on, and so it's easy to overlook that there's a `ui.input_select()` which appears just below the plot, inside the same card.

> Also, with multiple levels of indentation, it's easy to mess up the identation; and as a result, have the input appear in the wrong place, or not work at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, with multiple levels of indentation, it's easy to mess up the indentation and have the input appear in the wrong place, or not work at all.
```

> Express does offer a way to workaround this problem: the `ui.hold()` context manager, which allows you to define a `render` function in one place, then display it in another.

Reviewer: I think we need to include the Core syntax and why it's good here. Right now it reads:

1) Express has problem
2) Here's how to solve it in Express

I think the idea of this article is that it should motivate Shiny Core, so at the end the reader should know about Core syntax and want to give it a try. Could we do something like break the programming-with-express code into its own article and link to that?

> This, in a sense, is similar to what Shiny Core forces you to do: separate server from UI logic, and then connect them together with an `ui.output_*()` container element.

Reviewer: Does the reader know about `ui.output` at this point? Maybe we should add some text about this after line 15.
